[opentelemetry] Add guide to use heatmap widget with OTLP Histograms (#17638)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/guide/otlp_histogram_heatmaps.md

---
title: Visualizing OTLP Histograms as heatmaps
kind: guide
further_reading:
- link: "/metrics/open_telemetry/otlp_metric_types"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "OTLP Metric Types"
- link: "/opentelemetry/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "OpenTelemetry Support in Datadog"
---

## Overview

> The OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) supports sending OTLP Histograms, a type of metric that compresses information about a set of measurements by providing aggregate statistics (sum, count, min, max...) as well as counting how many of these measurements fall into user-configurable buckets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP) supports sending OTLP Histograms, a type of metric that compresses information about a set of measurements by providing aggregate statistics, like sum, count, min, and max. OTLP Histograms also count how many of these measurements fall into user-configurable buckets.
```

> You can visualize this datatype as a [heatmap][5] in Datadog by configuring your OpenTelemetry Collector Datadog exporter or Datadog Agent with the counters mode and using the 'pre-binned data' option in your heatmap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can visualize this datatype as a [heatmap][5] in Datadog by following the steps on this page.
```

**Note**: The related OTLP Exponential Histogram type can also be displayed as a heatmap, since it is converted to a distribution. Read more about distributions on the [dedicated Distributions page][4].

## Setup

This guide assumes you already have a [functioning setup for sending OpenTelemetry metrics to Datadog][1].

### OpenTelemetry SDK configuration

> If producing metrics from an OpenTelemetry SDK, you should take the following steps to configure them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are producing metrics from an OpenTelemetry SDK, take the following steps to configure them:
```

> 1. [Configure your SDK you are sending OTLP Histograms with delta temporality][2]. This will make the minimum and maximum available for the heatmap widget.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Configure the SDK you are sending OTLP Histograms with delta temporality][2]. This makes the minimum and maximum available for the heatmap widget.
```

> 2. Check if you want to override the [default bucket boundaries][3] from your aggregation. Note that each additional bucket is considered a separate custom metric.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Check if you want to override the [default bucket boundaries][3] from your aggregation. **Note**: Each additional bucket is considered a separate custom metric.
```

For metrics coming from other sources, ensure if possible that these come as delta OTLP Histograms with the minimum and maximum fields set.

> ### Datadog Agent or Datadog exporter configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Datadog Exporter or Datadog Agent configuration
```

> Set the histogram mode and enable aggregation metrics on your Datadog exporter or Datadog Agent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the histogram mode and enable aggregation metrics on your Datadog Exporter or Datadog Agent.
```

{{< tabs >}}

> {{% tab "Datadog exporter (OTel Collector)" %}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{% tab "Datadog Exporter (OTel Collector)" %}}
```

> On the Datadog exporter section, configure the histogram mode to `counters` and enable aggregation metrics with the `send_aggregation_metrics` flag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `collector.yaml` file for the Datadog Exporter, configure the histogram mode to `counters` and enable aggregation metrics with the `send_aggregation_metrics` flag.
```

```yaml
exporters:
  datadog:
    metrics:
      histograms:
        mode: counters
        send_aggregation_metrics: true
```

> **Note**: `send_aggregation_metrics` is available starting on the Datadog exporter v0.75.0. If using a previous version, use the `send_count_sum_metrics` flag instead. The minimum and maximum will be missing in previous versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: `send_aggregation_metrics` is available starting with Datadog Exporter v0.75.0. If you are using an earlier version, use the `send_count_sum_metrics` flag instead. The minimum and maximum are missing in earlier versions.
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Datadog Agent" %}}

On the `otlp_config` section, configure the histogram mode to `counters` and enable aggregation metrics with the `send_aggregation_metrics` flag.

```yaml
otlp_config:
  metrics:
    histograms:
      mode: counters
      send_aggregation_metrics: true
```

> **Note**: `send_aggregation_metrics` is available starting on the Datadog Agent v6.45.0/v7.45.0. If using a previous version, use the `send_count_sum_metrics` flag instead. The minimum and maximum will be missing in previous versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: `send_aggregation_metrics` is available starting on the Datadog Agent v6.45.0/v7.45.0. If you are using an earlier version, use the `send_count_sum_metrics` flag instead. The minimum and maximum are missing in earlier versions.
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

### Heatmap widget configuration

> The [heatmap widget][5] uses the set of `<YOUR METRIC NAME>.bucket` metrics generated by the Datadog Agent or Datadog exporter, each corresponding to a different histogram bucket. To visualize your histogram as a heatmap:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [heatmap widget][5] uses the set of `<YOUR METRIC NAME>.bucket` metrics generated by the Datadog Exporter or Datadog Agent, each corresponding to a different histogram bucket. To visualize your histogram as a heatmap:
```

> 1. Select `<YOUR METRIC NAME>.bucket` as the metric to visualize

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Select `<YOUR METRIC NAME>.bucket` as the metric to visualize.
```

2. Choose the `pre-binned data` option on the `distributions of` menu.

You can now see your OTLP Histogram as a heatmap widget.

## OpenMetrics compatibility

> The [Datadog Agent OpenMetrics check][6] is also compatible with the pre-binned data heatmap widget option. If you want to send metrics to the OpenMetrics check directly without converting to OpenTelemetry, enable the `collect_histogram_buckets` and `non_cumulative_histogram_buckets` flags on your instance to ensure the data is sent in a compatible way to Datadog.

Reviewer 2: whats the benefit of `send metrics to the OpenMetrics` ?

Author: The only people I see using this are people who were already using OpenMetrics but have not yet migrated to OpenTelemetry. Datadog still supports OpenMetrics so I thought it made sense to document it, but I don't think we should encourage people to use it.
